# Spontaneous current data summarized into 5-minute intervals

This is an example of the summary eEPSC data produced using
[`make_summary_EPSC_data()`](https://christelinda-laureijs.github.io/patchclampplotteR/reference/make_summary_EPSC_data.md).
It is useful for demonstrating functions that build off of this dataset,
such as
[`plot_summary_current_data()`](https://christelinda-laureijs.github.io/patchclampplotteR/reference/plot_summary_current_data.md).

## Format

An list of 5 dataframes. The first dataframe (`$summary_data`) contains
spontaneous current data for each cell, averaged per interval. The
second and third dataframes (`$percent_change_amplitude` and
`$percent_change_frequency`) have columns expressing the percent change
in spontaneous current amplitude or frequency in the last time interval
(`t15to20`) relative to the baseline (`t0to5`). The third and fourth
dataframes (`$mean_SE_amplitude` and `$mean_SE_frequency` contain mean
and standard deviation and error values for each interval for
spontaneous current amplitude and frequency, respectively.

### `$summary_data`

- `category`:

  A factor representing the experiment type. Used to assign top-level
  groups for further analyses, with `treatment` as subgroups. For
  example, "1" may refer to an experiment where you applied
  high-frequency stimulation (HFS) to a cell, while "2" is an experiment
  where you added a hormone like leptin. "3" may be an experiment where
  you applied HFS in the continuous presence of leptin.

- `letter`:

  A factor that is a unique identifier for a single recording. Used to
  link data sets for evoked or spontaneous currents and
  cell-characteristics.

- `sex`:

  A factor with two levels (e.g. "Male" or "Female").

- `treatment`:

  A factor based on the treatment applied (e.g. "Control", "HNMPA").
  This represents the antagonists or agonists applied, or any protocol
  applied to the animals (e.g. "Fasting").

- `interval`:

  A factor indicating the interval that the data point belongs to. For
  example, `interval` will be "t0to5" for any data points from 0 to 5
  minutes. Example values: "t0to5", "t5to10", etc.

- `mean_transformed_amplitude`:

  The average normalized spontaneous current amplitude (% Baseline sEPSC
  amplitude).

- `mean_raw_amplitude`:

  The average raw spontaneous current amplitude (pA).

- `n`:

  The number of datapoints used to create the average.

- `sd_transformed_amplitude`:

  The standard deviation of the normalized spontaneous current data
  (`mean_transformed_amplitude`).

- `se_transformed_amplitude`:

  The standard error of `mean_transformed_amplitude`.

- `mean_transformed_frequency`:

  The average normalized frequency (% Baseline frequency).

- `sd_transformed_frequency`:

  The standard deviation of `mean_transformed_frequency`.

- `se_frequency`:

  The standard error of `mean_transformed_frequency`.

- `mean_raw_frequency`:

  The average raw frequency (Hz).

- `time`:

  A numeric value that represents time in minutes. This column is
  autogenerated in
  [`add_new_cells()`](https://christelinda-laureijs.github.io/patchclampplotteR/reference/add_new_cells.md).

- `synapses`:

  A character value (e.g. "Glutamate" or "GABA").

- `days_alone`:

  A numeric value describing the number of days that the animal was left
  alone in a cage. This typically ranges from 0 to 2. Fasted animals
  will have 1 day alone.

- `animal_or_slicing_problems`:

  A character value ("yes" or "no") describing if there were any issues
  with the animal (for example, the animal was unusually anxious) or
  slicing (there were delays during the process, the slices were
  crumpling, etc.).

The second and third dataframes contain percent change data for
spontaneous current amplitude and frequency, respectively. The columns
are the same as the ones produced for evoked currents (read the
documentation for `sample_summary_eEPSC_df$percent_change_data`.

The fourth and fifth dataframes contain the mean, SE, SD, and n data for
spontaneous current amplitude and frequency, respectively. Read the
description for the `sample_summary_eEPSC_df$mean_SE` to learn about
these columns.

## See also

[`make_normalized_EPSC_data()`](https://christelinda-laureijs.github.io/patchclampplotteR/reference/make_normalized_EPSC_data.md)
and
[`make_pruned_EPSC_data()`](https://christelinda-laureijs.github.io/patchclampplotteR/reference/make_pruned_EPSC_data.md)
