# Representative data from a series of evoked (eEPSC) currents

This is an example of the raw eEPSC data produced using
[`make_normalized_EPSC_data()`](https://christelinda-laureijs.github.io/patchclampplotteR/reference/make_normalized_EPSC_data.md).
It is useful for demonstrating functions that build off of this dataset,
such as
[`make_pruned_EPSC_data()`](https://christelinda-laureijs.github.io/patchclampplotteR/reference/make_pruned_EPSC_data.md)
and plotting functions like
[`plot_raw_current_data()`](https://christelinda-laureijs.github.io/patchclampplotteR/reference/plot_raw_current_data.md)
and
[`plot_summary_current_data()`](https://christelinda-laureijs.github.io/patchclampplotteR/reference/plot_summary_current_data.md).

## Format

An .rda file containing 5680 objects of 20 variables.

- `letter`:

  A character value that is a unique identifier for a single recording.
  Used to link data sets for evoked or spontaneous currents and
  cell-characteristics.

- `synapses`:

  A character value (e.g. "Glutamate" or "GABA").

- `sex`:

  A character value (e.g. "Male" or "Female").

- `treatment`:

  A character value (e.g. "Control", "HNMPA") representing the
  antagonists or agonists applied, or any protocol applied to the
  animals (e.g. "Fasting").

- `time`:

  A numeric value that represents time in minutes. This column is
  autogenerated in
  [`add_new_cells()`](https://christelinda-laureijs.github.io/patchclampplotteR/reference/add_new_cells.md).

- `ID`:

  A character value for the recording filename.

- `P1`:

  A numeric value representing the amplitude of the first evoked current
  in pA.

- `P2`:

  A numeric value representing the amplitude of the second evoked
  current in pA.

- `X`:

  A numeric value representing the x-value of the cell's location in µm.
  Leave this blank if you don't have this data.

- `Y`:

  A numeric value representing the y-value of the cell's location in µm.
  Leave this blank if you don't have this data.

- `age`:

  A numeric value representing the animal's age. Can be any value as
  long as the time units are consistent throughout (e.g. don't mix up
  days and months when reporting animal ages).

- `animal`:

  A numeric value representing the animal's ID or number.

- `category`:

  A numeric value representing the experiment type. Used to assign
  top-level groups for further analyses, with `treatment` as subgroups.
  For example, "1" may refer to an experiment where you applied
  high-frequency stimulation (HFS) to a cell, while "2" is an experiment
  where you added a hormone like leptin. "3" may be an experiment where
  you applied HFS in the continuous presence of leptin.

- `cell`:

  A character or numeric value representing the cell. For example, use
  `3.1.1` for animal \#3, slice \#1, cell \#1.

- `notes`:

  An optional column for notes.

- `days_alone`:

  A numeric value describing the number of days that the animal was left
  alone in a cage. This typically ranges from 0 to 2. Fasted animals
  will have 1 day alone.

- `animal_or_slicing_problems`:

  A character value ("yes" or "no") describing if there were any issues
  with the animal (for example, the animal was unusually anxious) or
  slicing (there were delays during the process, the slices were
  crumpling, etc.).

- `R_a`:

  A list of numeric values indicating the access resistance. Please see
  the documentation for the dataset `sample_cell_characteristics`.

- `PPR`:

  (for evoked currents only) A numeric value that represents the paired
  pulse ratio (PPR) of the evoked currents, generated using
  `dplyr::mutate(PPR = P2/P1)`.

- `interval`:

  A character value indicating the interval that the data point belongs
  to. For example, `interval` will be "t0to5" for any data points from 0
  to 5 minutes. Example values: "t0to5", "t5to10", etc.

- `baseline_range`:

  A logical value required for the baseline transformation. It is set to
  TRUE when time is within the baseline period (e.g. Time \<= 5) and
  FALSE at all other times.

- `baseline_mean`:

  A numeric value representing the mean evoked current amplitude during
  the baseline period. There is a different baseline_mean for each
  letter.

- `P1_transformed`:

  A numeric value representing the first evoked current amplitude (pA)
  normalized relative to the mean amplitude during the recording's
  baseline.

- `P2_transformed`:

  A numeric value representing the second evoked current amplitude (pA)
  normalized relative to the mean amplitude during the recording's
  baseline.

## See also

[`make_normalized_EPSC_data()`](https://christelinda-laureijs.github.io/patchclampplotteR/reference/make_normalized_EPSC_data.md),
[`make_pruned_EPSC_data()`](https://christelinda-laureijs.github.io/patchclampplotteR/reference/make_pruned_EPSC_data.md),
and
[`plot_raw_current_data()`](https://christelinda-laureijs.github.io/patchclampplotteR/reference/plot_raw_current_data.md)
