# Representative data from a series of spontaneous (sEPSC) currents

This is an example of the raw spontaneous current data produced using
[`make_normalized_EPSC_data()`](https://christelinda-laureijs.github.io/patchclampplotteR/reference/make_normalized_EPSC_data.md).
It is useful for demonstrating functions that build off of this dataset,
such as
[`make_pruned_EPSC_data()`](https://christelinda-laureijs.github.io/patchclampplotteR/reference/make_pruned_EPSC_data.md)
and plotting functions like
[`plot_raw_current_data()`](https://christelinda-laureijs.github.io/patchclampplotteR/reference/plot_raw_current_data.md)
and
[`plot_summary_current_data()`](https://christelinda-laureijs.github.io/patchclampplotteR/reference/plot_summary_current_data.md).

## Format

An .rda file containing 5680 objects of 20 variables.

- `letter`:

  A character value that is a unique identifier for a single recording.
  Used to link data sets for evoked or spontaneous currents and
  cell-characteristics.

- `ID`:

  A character value for the recording filename.

- `recording_num`:

  A numeric value representing the recording number. This was
  incorporated before we switched to concatenating all recordings into
  one, but it needs to remain here to prevent breaking previous
  projects. It should be set to 1.

- `trace`:

  A numeric value representing the trace (automatically generated in
  Clampfit) where the current occurred.

- `time_of_peak`:

  A numeric value representing the time of the peak in milliseconds
  relative to trace number. This is automatically calculated in
  Clampfit.

- `amplitude`:

  A numeric value representing the amplitude of the evoked current in
  pA.

- `cell`:

  A character or numeric value representing the cell. For example, use
  `3.1.1` for animal \#3, slice \#1, cell \#1.

- `sex`:

  A character value (e.g. "Male" or "Female").

- `X`:

  A numeric value representing the x-value of the cell's location in µm.
  Leave this blank if you don't have this data.

- `Y`:

  A numeric value representing the y-value of the cell's location in µm.
  Leave this blank if you don't have this data.

- `age`:

  A numeric value representing the animal's age. Can be any value as
  long as the time units are consistent throughout (e.g. don't mix up
  days and months when reporting animal ages).

- `animal`:

  A numeric value representing the animal's ID or number.

- `synapses`:

  A character value (e.g. "Glutamate" or "GABA").

- `notes`:

  An optional column for notes.

- `days_alone`:

  A numeric value describing the number of days that the animal was left
  alone in a cage. This typically ranges from 0 to 2. Fasted animals
  will have 1 day alone.

- `animal_or_slicing_problems`:

  A character value ("yes" or "no") describing if there were any issues
  with the animal (for example, the animal was unusually anxious) or
  slicing (there were delays during the process, the slices were
  crumpling, etc.).

- `R_a`:

  A list of numeric values indicating the access resistance. Please see
  the documentation for the dataset `sample_cell_characteristics`.

- `treatment`:

  A character value (e.g. "Control", "HNMPA") representing the
  antagonists or agonists applied, or any protocol applied to the
  animals (e.g. "Fasting").

- `category`:

  A numeric value representing the experiment type. Used to assign
  top-level groups for further analyses, with `treatment` as subgroups.
  For example, "1" may refer to an experiment where you applied
  high-frequency stimulation (HFS) to a cell, while "2" is an experiment
  where you added a hormone like leptin. "3" may be an experiment where
  you applied HFS in the continuous presence of leptin.

- `time`:

  A numeric value representing the absolute time when the current
  happened, relative to the start of the recording. This is
  autogenerated. See \[add_new_cells() for a description of how the true
  time value (`time`) is calculated from the `recording_num` and
  `trace.`

- `interval`:

  A character value indicating the interval that the data point belongs
  to. For example, `interval` will be "t0to5" for any data points from 0
  to 5 minutes. Example values: "t0to5", "t5to10", etc.

- `baseline_range`:

  A logical value required for the baseline transformation. It is set to
  TRUE when time is within the baseline period (e.g. Time \<= 5) and
  FALSE at all other times.

- `baseline_mean`:

  A numeric value representing the mean evoked current amplitude during
  the baseline period. There is a different baseline_mean for each
  letter.

- `amplitude_transformed`:

  A numeric value representing the spontaneous current amplitude (pA)
  normalized relative to the mean spontaneous current amplitude during
  the recording's baseline.

## See also

[`make_normalized_EPSC_data()`](https://christelinda-laureijs.github.io/patchclampplotteR/reference/make_normalized_EPSC_data.md)
and
[`make_pruned_EPSC_data()`](https://christelinda-laureijs.github.io/patchclampplotteR/reference/make_pruned_EPSC_data.md)
for functions that use this dataset.
